I've learned about 10 languages over the past 20 years. For the first few I found it was necessary to have a good book (usually published by O'Reilly) that covers the entire language, starting from the basics. Tutorials and articles found on the Internet are also really helpful to get going quickly and stay excited. Getting and staying excited is really important, because learning a new language can be really frustrating. For this reason you should have a project you're interested in that you're working on while you're learning the basics. This can be something new, or a port of something you did in another language.

Once you've gone through an introductory book (or perhaps while you're reading it), you are probably ready to start reading other people's code. This requires some motivation because it's less guided than a book, but it's really important if you want to become proficient at the language. Find a reputable open source project, and try to figure out how it does some task. For example, if you're looking at a web framework, figure out how it maps a URL to a function or path of execution (routing). Or figure out how it renders templates. You will probably need to look up a lot of things, since you will encounter idioms, operators, and functions that you haven't used before, or that are used differently than you're familiar with. Like reading a good novel, it will increase your active vocabulary. Be patient, and don't give up if you don't get something right away.

Once you've learned a few languages you may be able to pick up others without the introductory book. I've had success learning syntax and basic idioms from web sites, but I still find some sort of book necessary, like a "X Best Practices" or "Advanced X" book.

Also, Stack Overflow is a fantastic site, but I'd strongly recommend trying to figure things out on your own before posting questions. I've noticed something different about the way I learn when I've figured something out for myself. It gives me more confidence, and makes me more excited to figure out more. It may take you longer, but I think it is time well spent. (Don't take this the wrong way--I'm obviously a fan of SO.)


